# Drupal & Tools

This covers Drupal 8 and development tools related to it.

## Requirements
- Composer
- Git
- Docker
- Docker Compose

## 1. Setting Up Drupal on Docker

### a. Getting Drupal and Docker running

This setup is done on windows, the main projects directory is as close as the C folder to avoid path length limit to 260 characters on Windows. In the following steps, the projects folder is C:\webroot\ and the project name is called "Origin Drop".

The following commands will:

- Navigate to the webroot directory
- Create a Drupal 8 project into webroot/origindrop/ folder
- Download the docker setup from Origin Docker repository into your new project directory.
- Install docker containers locally (a LEMP stack working with Nginx, Php 7, MariaDB, PhpMyAdmin and mailhog)

```shell
$ cd /webroot
$ composer create-project drupal-composer/drupal-project:8.x-dev origindrop --stability dev --no-interaction
```
This may take a while as it will setup Drupal 8 using composer from the [Drupal Composer project](https://github.com/drupal-composer/drupal-project). Once it's done:

```shell
$ cd /origindrop
$ curl https://raw.githubusercontent.com/origindesign/origin-docker/master/docker-compose.yml > docker-compose.yml
$ docker-compose up -d
$ docker-compose ps
```
This downloads the docker-compose.yml file from origin repository and store it in your project. If you don't have curl setup, you can still download the file manually and place it in the root of the project.  The `docker-compose up -d` command creates and runs all the Docker containers necessary for Drupal to run. Note that the PHP container has Composer and Drush pre-installed. Finally, The `docker-compose ps` command should list all the Docker Container running. Make sure their states are all up.

### b. Installing Drupal

If everything went well:

- Navigate to <http://localhost:8000> and you should see the Drupal Installation page
- Navigate to <http://localhost:8001> and you should see PhpMyAdmin interface with an empty drupal database
- From the install page, follow the classic Drupal installation step using the following credentials:
```
Database: drupal
Username: drupal
Password: drupal
host: mariadb
port: 3306
```
- After the installation, enter the site information and you should get your fresh Drupal 8 Site.
- At the time of this writing, docker has some permissions issues in the files directory with drupal 8.2.x version in the core/includes/files.inc. This can be solved by using drupal > 8.3.x (alpha at the time of this writing) and applying this [patch](https://www.drupal.org/node/944582)

### c. Architecture
<pre>
webroot/
└── origindrop/
    ├── docker-runtime/
    |   └── ...
    ├── drush/
    |   └── ...
    ├── scripts/
    |   └── ...
    ├── vendor/
    |   └── ...
    ├── web/
    |   ├── core/
    |   ├── modules/
    |   ├── profiles/
    |   ├── sites/
    |   ├── themes/
    |   ├── .htaccess
    |   ├── autoload.php
    |   ├── index.php
    |   ├── robots.txt
    |   ├── update.php
    |   ├── web.config
    |   └── ...
    ├── .gitignore
    ├── .travis.yml
    ├── composer.json
    ├── composer.lock
    ├── docker-compose.yml
    ├── LICENCE
    ├── phpunit.xml.dist
    └── README.md
</pre>

### d. Stopping and Removing containers

When you want to stop working on a project, type `docker-compose stop` from the root of the project, it will stop the containers.
IMPORTANT: Do not use `docker-compose down` command because it will purge MariaDB volume. Instead use `docker-compose stop`. If you restart Docker you WILL NOT lose your MariaDB data. 

## 2. Using composer to manage modules

Note about composer

## 3. Using Drush to manage Config Manager and Cache Rebuild

- Drush can be accessed normally after sshing into the php container:
```shell
$ docker-compose exec php sh
$ cd var/www/html/web
$ drush status
```
- Drush can aslo be accessed through the docker-compose command and by specifiying the root directory `docker-compose exec php drush -r /var/www/html/web/ status`
- In order to simplify the command, you can create an alias in your .bashrc file like `alias ddrush='docker-compose exec php drush'` (I called mine "ddrush" for docker drush)
- Then you'd need to create your drush aliases and copy it from your local machine to the php container drush directory:
```shell
$ cd ~/.drush
$ docker cp origindrop.aliases.drushrc.php origindrop_php_1:/root/.drush/origindrop.aliases.drushrc.php
```
- Depending on the name you set for your aliases, you should be able to run drush from your local like these:
```shell
$ ddrush @local status 
$ ddrush @pantheon.origindrop.dev status 
```


## 4. Pushing into Host (Pantheon)

If you want to use Pantheon straight without using a CI workflow, edit the .gitgnore file of your project and comment out the lines relative to the web and vendor directory. Ultimately, you should have something like:
```
# Ignore directories generated by Composer
/drush/contrib/
# /vendor/
# /web/core/
# /web/modules/contrib/
# /web/themes/contrib/
# /web/profiles/contrib/
# /web/libraries/

# Ignore Drupal's file directory and symlink
/web/sites/*/files
/web/sites/*/files/

# Ignore settings local
/web/sites/*/settings.local.php

# Ignore SimpleTest multi-site environment.
web/sites/simpletest

# Ignore files generated by PhpStorm
/.idea/
```
From the Pantheon Dashboard, create a new Drupal 8 site; then, before installing Drupal, set your site to git mode and do the following from the root of your local project:

```shell
$ git init
$ git add -A .
$ git commit -m "Setting up Drupal with web docroot"
$ git remote add origin ssh://ID@ID.drush.in:2222/~/repository.git
$ git push --force origin master
```
Replace ssh://ID@ID.drush.in:2222/~/repository.git with the URL from the middle of the SSH clone URL from the Connection Info popup dialog on your dashboard.

There might be some drush conflict when pushing from your local to pantheon directly. The recommended solution is to use the "per project drush" way which embed drush in the vendor directory through composer. By default it's added with the drupal-composer upstream. However, if it's not working, it might be necessary to use the global drush packaged in by Pantheon hosting. In order to do that, you can simply remove drush from your composer.json by doing `compose remove drush/drush`.

## Troubleshooting
- If you use Mintty as a terminal emulator for Cygwin, you may have some issues when trying to ssh into docker containers. Prefered solution it to use default cmd for Cygwin or git bash if you prefer not to use Cygwin. See the discusion [here](https://github.com/docker/docker/pull/22956)

## References
- Based on [docker4drupal](https://github.com/Wodby/docker4drupal)


